Brahms symphonies come in pairs, the contrasts within each pair being more striking than the affinities. The tensely dramatic No. 1, hammered out against the background of Brahms's Beethoven-induced inhibitions over more than two decades of intermittent but concentrated creative labour, was followed within a mere matter of months by No. 2, an apparently trouble-free birth and an issue as sunny in disposition as any among his æuvre.
Then, six and eight years later respectively, came Nos. 3 and 4, the latter composed on two summer visits to Mürzzuschlag in Styria in 1884 and 1885, and prepared for performance by Hans von Bülow, whose Meiningen orchestra gave it its première under Brahms s direction on 25 October 1885. This time the characters of the two works relate rather like a breath in followed by a breath out.
Whereas the Third is a sharp, crisply purposeful in-gathering of resources, the Fourth permits its expansive — almost prodigal — parade of themes a large, elaborate interplay. But there are deeper differences too.
The Fourth is a strange symphony, standing indeed apart from all the other three in essential character more than in surface detail. It is a picturesque piece, and Brahms is almost never picturesque. There is in it an atmosphere of the far away and long ago; a scent of fable; a knightly, castellated quality.
Particularly is this true of the middle movements. Both of them — the bardic, ballad-like Andante moderato with its stylized grandeur, and the mighty jollification of the Allegro giocoso are töuched with that innocent solemnity peculiar to the mature yet childlike Brahms. By contrast, the unblinking epic vision of the finale is the more searing in its turning from romanticism back to reality.
Brahms is a Janus figure in musical history: he faces both past and future. This same ambiguity characterizes both the finale and, in a different way, the opening Allegro non troppo of the Fourth Symphony. The finale is cast in the form of a passacaglia, or set of variations on a regularly repeated ground bass; and through the thirty variations that lead to its Inexorably tragic coda, the shape of the bass is preserved with remarkable fidelity.
To that extent, the form and treatment are unprecedented in the symphonic medium. But the ground bass itself pays homage to one of Brahms's great idols of the past: it is a modified version of a theme from Bach's Cantata No. 150 (Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich), expanded from five bars to eight and coloured by a chromatic addition at its fifth note.
In the first movement, again, though the traditional elements of the sonata pattern are evident to any ear familiar with the symphonies of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, the composer reshapes tradition to some thoroughly unconventional ends of his own. Brahms here breaks with the custom, followed in his three earlier symphonic first movements, of repeating the exposition.
Mozart had done the same in a few of his middle symphonies and Beethoven in his Ninth, but in this case the point of the omission is much more clearly defined. As far as its eighth bar, Brahms keeps the development section proceeding on lines that exactly match those of the exposition.
And so, until the third horn, supported by the clarinets, makes its telltale move in a new melodic direction in the development's ninth bar, the listener is likely to be gulled into thinking that a repeat actually is under way.
Thus neatly playing off familiar patterns with fresh invention, Brahms honours the central classical notion of traditionally based yet infinitely fertile forms, just as his extraction of an immensely variegated range of themes from the basic pattern of a falling melodic third fulfils the essential symphonic idea of variety in unity, each enhancing the other.  END